[Music]
hey Upstream listeners Eric here this
week we're releasing a conversation from
the cognitive Revolution a podcast on
the turpentine Network between host
Nathan leben and Michael Levan a
professor of biology at tus University
if you enjoy this episode please check
the cognitive revolution in the
description for more like this without
further Ado I'll hand it over to Nathan
to give you some more context for the
conversation please
enjoy hello and welcome back to the
cognitive Revolution today's episode is
a special one my guest is Mike Levan
professor of biology at tus University
and one of the most distinctively
accomplished experimental scientists and
one of the most fascinating philosophers
of intelligence that I've encountered in
my life we cover a ton of ground over
the next hour and 15 minutes and this is
not an easy conversation to summarize if
you're like me and usually listen to
podcasts at 2x speeed I might suggest
slowing this one down just a bit because
unless you are already familiar with
Professor Len's work there are simply so
many strange results and deeply
thought-provoking ideas in this
conversation but I found my brain at
least needed a little extra time to
process it all it might also help to
watch some of the short videos that
Levan and his team have released over
the years both on his YouTube channel
and their academic Group website
after listening back to this
conversation myself a few major themes
do stand out first AI defies all
binaries I say that all the time but
Levan's work takes that sentiment to the
next level by showing that even the most
familiar binary distinctions the ones
that we take most for granted such as
that between a living thing and a
machine are in fact rapidly collapsing
from both directions as we
simultaneously see remarkably
sophisticated behavior from even very
simple computer systems on the one hand
and at the same time on the other groups
like Professor Levens devising striking
ways to program biology itself second we
have a lot of surprising latent
capabilities left to discover just as
gp4 can do far more now than we knew
about at the beginning so it is with
biological systems particularly when we
place them way out of distribution as
Levan has done in his famous xenobot and
anobot
projects third and perhaps most
importantly we must always f for
epistemic modesty and open-minded
experimentation over our philosophical
commitments many of the capabilities
that Levan has discovered in biological
systems would have been laughed off as
impossible if not crazy right up until
the moment that he demonstrated them
reflecting broadly on how little we know
about even the simplest systems with
which we've co-evolved should be enough
to keep anyone humble particularly in
the presence of new systems that don't
share our evolutionary history in Lev's
view the hot button topic of of
emergence in AI systems a subject that I
plan to cover in depth with a dedicated
episode soon is inherently a subjective
question and ultimately boils down to
the element of surprise I agree with
this Framing and I was struck to hear
that Lan a worldclass bioh hacker by any
measure who is obviously willing to
conduct experiments that some might
consider playing God still has
consciously avoided working on ideas
that could make AI systems significantly
more lifelike than they are today at
least in he has a better understanding
of what that might imply for their
subjective experience and our Collective
future as always if you're enjoying the
show we'd appreciate it if you'd take a
moment to share it with your friends
considering how it brings such critical
themes to the four I think this episode
would be a great introduction to the
cognitive Revolution as a whole and if I
could be so bold I think it is worth
sharing
widely now with full credit to Professor
Levan his team and the many marvelous
intelligence systems that they study I
hope you enjoyed this paradig shifting
conversation with professor of biology
Mike Levan Professor Mike Levan
professor of biology at tus University
Welcome to the cognitive Revolution
thanks so much happy to be here I'm
really excited about this conversation
you do some of the most fascinating work
some of the most mind-blowing work uh
really of anyone out there today I think
when people learn more about if they've
never encountered your work before when
they learn about some of the projects
that you have um that you have developed
they're going to just think wow like how
did I not already know about this and
it's profound stuff on its own terms but
I think it also you know hopefully will
be able to help us um develop some new
and kind of different perspectives on
the future of AI as well so I'm really
excited to get into it for starters uh
because I do suspect that you know we
have obviously a lot of AI enthusiasts
and builders in the audience but I'm not
sure how familiar many will be with your
work do you want to just kind of go
through a few of your kind of most
famous projects I think if folks know
any uh from you it would be the xenobots
and the more recent anthr robots that
you have created so maybe just tee
things up by kind of telling us about
these strange uh creatures that you have
managed to create sure well uh my lab
does a wide variety of interesting
things I work with some amazing people
that um span the range from uh
philosophy to biology to computer
science to physics and so on and uh
everything we do is around
fun fundamentally it's all around this
notion of embodied minds and what it
means to be a cognitive agent in this
physical universe and uh we study mind
in a variety of unusual substrates and
so we think about things like the
collective intelligence of cells during
embryonic development during
regeneration and so on so I'll just um
kind of run down some interesting things
we've done um in the past um let's see
uh one of the things that we specialize
in is that we made the first molecular
tools to read and write the electrical
memories of non- neural cells and so
this this collective intelligence of
cells that builds organisms and and so
on it has to store memories of what it's
doing and we now have ways of reading
and writing that information and so
we've done things like look at uh how
the uh different cells of a flatworm
know how many heads the flatworm is
supposed to have and it turns out
there's an electrical memory that stores
that information and you can rewrite it
you can physically rewrite it and then
what you get is a worm that when you cut
it into pieces uh the pieces make
two-headed worms forever it's permanent
so that memory like um like any good
memory it's it's rewritable but it's
stable and so you get these these two
headed worms and of course the genetics
are untouched so this question of where
is the number of heads stored is really
interesting because it isn't in the
hardware it's it's it's software
rewritable so we've done things like
this we've made uh tads with eyes on
their tail and those animals can see out
of those eyes and so this shows the
remarkable plasticity of of life because
you can produce this uh animal with a
completely different architecture of
sensors and and processor in the brain
and it will it will adapt to a new a new
connectivity of that system we've had
projects in cancer where we uh can
detect and normalize cancer by
controlling its bioelectrical
connections between the cells and the
and the large scale Network that can
remember how to build large complicated
organs as opposed to being an amike
cancer cell as as you said we've created
zenbot and anthr robots which is uh
looking at the plasticity of cells that
normally will build very specific things
like frog embryos or or human human
bodies and we've shown that if you put
them in new environments and give them
an opportunity to sort of reboot their
multicellularity then they can do that
in new ways and have new and interesting
capabilities that we didn't know about
before so all of these these Concepts
keep coming up again and again this idea
of of of the software Hardware
distinction in biology and I know a lot
of people are very suspicious about
computer analogies in biology we can
sort of dig into which part of that is
is true and then which part of that is
not but um yeah those are those are some
of the things we do so these are really
incredible pretty stunning results I
mean some of the short videos and some
of the images of these little living
things or kind of Quasi living things
are really just you know like again how
did I not know about this
previously I don't understand how it
works I I wonder if you could give me a
little bit more you know kind of sense
of
how you're doing this control so again
like you start with a worm that has this
like remarkable regenerative capability
where it you know you can cut the worm
in half it'll regrow so that's how the
worm starts then you do the chop in half
but you apply some change and instead of
growing the missing part it will grow a
second head or a second tail you know
and you can control that and again the
Tad poles with the the eyes on the leg
from the tail the tail thank you can you
give us a little bit more intuition
around like what are you doing there
I've I think I've heard you use the term
like executing store
procedures but I'm still kind of at a
loss as to the details of the
interventions that you're actually
making and would love to understand that
a little bit better sure um yeah there's
a there's a variety of techniques but
let's just let's just talk about the the
bioelectric memory rewriting so I'll
give you I'll give you a a kind of a a
simple story about the workflow that
that we're doing so you've got a you've
got a flatworm and it has a head and the
tail and these flatworms are actually an
amazing model because not only are they
incredibly regenerative but they also
are they're Immortal and they have no
obvious lifespan limit the you know the
asexual ones that we work with don't
seem to age at all they're highly cancer
resistant they uh they can learn they
can form memories in fact you can you
know you can do the old mcconell
experiments which we have done where you
train them cut off their heads they
regrow a new brain and then they still
remember the original information right
so this incredible ability to move
information around from tissue to tissue
in the body right and imprint it the new
brain so they do all these cool things
but if you if you cut them in half so
imagine you've got a worm like this
you've got a head here you got a tail
here you cut it in half something
amazing happens which is that the cells
on this side of the cut and so the head
is over here so the cells on this side
of the cut end up growing a tail the
cells on this side of the cut end up
growing a head and so now you got two
normal worms but they were right next
neighbors to each other why did they
have completely different anatomical
outcomes and how is it that a fragment
right so you can cut the worm into
fragments how is it that a frag private
knows exactly how many heads it's
supposed to have one of the first things
we did was to well well just to realize
that that the algorithm of knowing
should you be a head or a tail cannot be
local because these cells were at the
same location so you know right away
that from knowing where you were you
cannot tell whether you should be a head
or a tail you have to talk to the rest
of the tissue and so uh for for many
reasons my hypothesis was that that
conversation with the rest of the
tissues was electrical in nature so the
very first thing we did was simply
prevent it we said what happens if if
you're cut off from the electrical
Network and you you really can't um find
out so in that case what what you would
do is um there are drugs um specific
specific pharmacological compounds that
you can put on these worms in the water
that they're regenerating in that um
control how well the cells can talk to
each other electrically that's that's
one of the things we started with then
we applied uh something called voltage
sensitive fluorescent dyes so these are
just molecules that are developed by
other people so chemists that develop
these things you um throw them onto the
sample and they will fluores so you use
a microscope to detect the fluoresence
and they fluores differently depending
on the voltage of the cell that they
happen to be sitting in so you get this
o right away you get this map across the
entire tissue I'm making it sound very
easy it's actually an incredibly you
know sort of time consuming and and
difficult process but eventually you get
you get a map of where all the voltages
in this tissue are and what we noticed
is that we could interpret this map to
say where the head and the tail was
going to be in the future in other words
it's really a kind of pattern memory
that tells you where it's going to be
and so once you've seen that it becomes
pretty obvious to then say well what if
I change that pattern and what if I now
I I can see that it says one head well I
would like it to say two heads what will
happen and so now you have an electric
circuit and what you can do is you can
make because because so you can make a
computational model of that electric
circuit in the tissue so we do a lot of
computational modeling and you can ask
that that model what do I need to do to
change the pattern so that it now says
two heads instead of one head and so by
by playing around with that model you
can say ah I need to close some chloride
channels over here or I need to open
some potassium channels or something
because in in all of these things what
we're doing is we're not applying any
electric Fields where there are no
magnets no waves no radiation there's no
electromagnetics none of that what we're
doing is hacking the natural interface
that these cells use to control each
other's behavior that that interface is
a bunch of electrical um electrogenic
proteins known as ion channels which sit
on the surface of the cell they produce
a voltage and the next cell can feel
that voltage and they communicate to
each other through it's it's very much
like what happens in the brain actually
right it's it's very similar so so what
we are doing is using either drugs or
optogenetics not not in the Worm but in
other cases we've used optogenetics so
that's light based um opening these
channels on and off and um there's some
some other molecular biology kind of
tricks but the idea is to open and close
the existing channels on these cell
surfaces so you can think think about it
as an interface it's like a you know
like a like a keyboard or any other
interface that you would have to the to
the programmable layers underneath your
machine that's what this electrical um
system is so so so Guided by you know
originally just designing these
cocktails in in our heads but eventually
with a computational model we can we can
pick drugs that are going to open and
close these channels in the right way to
give you the pattern that you want and
then you soak you soak your fragment of
the planarian in that drug you know you
typically you do that between you know
minimum of 3 hours in some cases 24 or
48 hours and then you leave it alone and
you you wash it out you put in regular
water and you see what it does that's a
typical work flow there's some others
but that's
typical we'll continue our interview in
a moment after a word from our sponsors
hey listeners it's Eric if you're
looking for more expert level
conversations but specifically about top
negotiation strategies then I have the
perfect podcast recommendation for you
deal craft insights from great
negotiators hosted by Jim sabanus
Harvard Business School professor and
renowned negotiation expert deal craft
features interview VI with the world's
greatest dealmakers and diplomats from
former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger to Blackstone Steve schwarzman
on their most challenging negotiations
from which Jim draws lessons for
listeners not to mention that the
guardian recently called deal ccraft a
best podcast pick new episodes released
weekly and I'd recommend starting with
their first episode which reveals how
legendary entertainment attorney John
brona was able to successfully negotiate
for Michael Jackson's ownership of his
master recordings and the Beatles
catalog almost unprecedented Feats of
the time so don't miss out follow deal
craft insights from great negotiators on
Apple podcasts Spotify or wherever you
get your podcasts hey everyone Eric here
you know at turpentine we're always
looking for ways to streamline our work
that's why we use notion for all our
internal documents it's been a game
changer for us and I want to tell you
why notion is this amazing all-in-one
workspace that combines your notes docs
and projects but what's really cool is
their new notion AI it's like having
multiple AI tools built right in you can
search generate analyze and chat all
without leaving notion what sets notion
AI apart is how it personalizes
responses based on your content it's not
just another generic chat bot it
understands the context of your work
plus it can search across thousands of
docs in seconds even connecting to tools
like slack and Google Docs and get this
notion is used by over half of the
Fortune 500 companies teams using it
send less emails cancel more meetings
and save time searching for their work
it's designed to keep everyone on the
same page while protecting your privacy
want to give it a try head over to
notion.com Upstream pod that's all
lowercase notion.com Upstream pod you
can try notion for free and when you use
our link you're supporting our show give
the powerful easy to use notion AI a
shot today at notion.com Upstream
pod it's striking how similar that is in
some ways to some of the mechanistic
interpretability techniques that people
are developing to try to understand how
AI systems work it really sounds a lot
like active ation patching which is
where and again it's often done in toy
models so you know again there's a
notable
similarity people will take the the
model and of course with an AI it's all
it starts digital right so you have the
um you have a lot easier path to looking
inside it than you do in a biological
system but that doesn't mean it's any
easier to know what's going on inside
because it's still just you know a lot
of numbers flying around and you know
what does it all mean is not easy
but doing the simulations it sounds like
you're almost kind of running a lot of
forward passes so to speak in your
simulation you're kind of saying with
this electrical pattern like what do we
expect to happen and then if we perturb
that pattern what would happen
differently is that the is that the sort
of counterfactual modeling you're doing
we have uh several different levels of
models so some models are exactly what
you just described so so it's a it's a
the model only feeds forward and all
we're able to do is run multiple
counteract actual scenarios until we see
what we get in some cases we can
actually run it backwards and we can say
actually if I want this result what what
I have had to do and of course now we're
working to integrate modern AI methods
so that you can actually train and and
have an you know have an AI inance that
will actually make guesses about what to
do that's that's the next step in all of
these cases uh so so so this is very
much an interpretability issue because
we don't know what the native
representation en coding is so it is not
obvious how the different voltage
gradients are mapping onto whatever
happens next it's very parallel to
neural decoding in the brain where you
read brain States from a from a patient
or from an animal model and then
eventually you try to you try to guess
well what was he thinking about when you
know when that right you're trying to
infer um semantic States from the
physiology from the readout of of the of
the network so so that's what we're
doing and it functions on many levels
and so you can measure individual cells
and get metric of is that a stem cell is
it a cancer cell is it a mature
differentiated cell you can do that you
can take measurements of whole tissues
and you can say um are you going to be
an eye or are you going to be a leg or
you know what what what's the shape or
the face like what's the shape of the
face where do the eyes go and then you
can have very high level information
where we have we've we had this project
in the frog that um frogs unlike
salamanders they don't regenerate their
legs so if they lose a leg what we're
able to do is go in with a with a
bioelectric um drug that triggers leg
regeneration but what's what's cool
there's two things that are cool about
it and of course that now we're sort of
trying to move that to Mice And So
eventually hopefully humans someday but
but the idea what what's what's
interesting is that first of all the
intervention in the latest experiments
uh the intervention is 24 hours the leg
then grows for 18 months so it isn't a
micromanagement the kind of thing we're
not sitting there telling every cell
what to do telling all the you know all
the the genes which comes on which comes
off it it's a very early communication
to the leg that says take this path in
morphospace towards a nice leg not this
path that leads to scarring and and
that's the end and then the other thing
is that the exact same intervention that
regenerates legs in adult frogs causes
regeneration of Tails and tpes so what
that means is that the the the the
information content is not really in the
intervention we don't give it all the
information needed to make a complex leg
or a complex tail we say at that in that
particular application we say build
whatever normally goes here so you're
offloading a huge amount of information
onto the system of the task onto the
system itself we it all of this works
because the system knows what to do and
it is our job to convince it that it
should do one thing versus that versus
another so it's very much so at all
these different layers you know we can
look at the cell layer we can uh you
know we can look at the tissue the organ
and then the whole the whole kind of in
fact in our latest paper that came out
just yesterday we showed that even
groups of embryos have their own uh
decision making uh collect collective
decision making that individuals can do
and so yeah it's it's very much an
interpretability question to understand
how how does the system understand its
own States and then how do we as
scientists understand them as well
there's so many connections even you
know just listening to your your
comments there when you talk about
running things backward you know that
obviously reminds me of back propagation
but kind of in you know a very similar
way too of answering the question what
would have had to be different in the
Upstream signals in order to get the
desired Downstream outcome I mean that's
really the kind of tweaking that's
that's going on in the the AI models in
the back propagation process also mode
switching you know is an interesting
when people train the the current chat
Bots to like refuse your you know bad
requests right for whatever the
definition of bad is that they want to
exclude from the Model
Behavior there seems to be this kind of
early fork in the road that could be
characterized in different ways but mode
switching is one label that has really
stuck with me where if you can get the
AI to say oh sure happy to help with
that then it will continue to do the bad
thing against its training whereas you
know if it starts with I'm sorry as a
you know large language model trained by
open AI I can't do that then you know
it's never going to do it it's striking
that there's something similar at the
level of like limb regeneration where
basically if I'm understanding you
correctly you kind of have this early
fork in like which mode are we going to
go into to and that intervention lasts
for basically two orders of magn you
said like one day to like 100 days
essentially that you can where the the
effect persists did I catch that right
yeah yeah it's a 18 months 18 months so
yeah I you know I I I really think that
there are a lot of similarities here in
terms of you know if you think of a the
kind of the classic uh a&n structure
where you have the different layers that
that are progressive um abstractions
right of the of the input that that have
come in so I I I think the higher you
are on that as as a as somebody who
works in regenerative medicine or or
bioengineering I I think that you want
to be as high as possible on that um on
that level for control because I I don't
want to have to tell you which genes to
turn on I don't even want to have to
tell you which types of tissues go where
I I just want to say you already know
what goes here just rebuild it that's it
I want to have the minimal the you know
kind of the simplest trigger and the
systems decide that the decisions are
made very early on what what what it's
going to do and then after that there's
a Cascade once it's exactly like you
said once once you're going down a
particular Road it becomes much harder
to uh to to to make changes so you want
to you want to do it as high up in the
in the decision hierarchy as you can
yeah I mean that's another just striking
similarity is the existence of
surprising capabilities you know gp4
this has been remarked on a ton right it
was trained training was complete 18
months ago it was released like 10
months ago we're still seeing new
state-of-the-arts set with people just
prompting it in ever more sophisticated
ways and and revealing kind of
capabilities that nobody quite knew
existed here it's striking to me that
obviously you haven't demonstrated this
in humans yet but you're working your
way up the the sort of you know
complexity of organisms ladder and I
guess this is maybe an ignorant question
but like why doesn't it happen you know
why do we not regenerate our limbs if we
have this capability why is it seemingly
like never expressed or is it maybe is
it sometimes expressed or are there
examples of people who have done this
I've never heard of anyone regenerating
a limb it's crazy that to think that
that capability is latent yeah um well
so so children human children regenerate
fingertips so so up until a certain age
somewhere between seven and 11 years old
um kids will regenerate their fingertips
we don't know why humans don't
regenerate their limbs I can tell you a
story that might make a little bit of
sense but but it's just the story we
don't know for sure so so here's a story
imagine imagine that you're a Maman an
ancestor so you're this ancient um you
know mousike creature you're running out
running around the forest uh somebody
bites your leg off so now here's the
problem uh a you're going to try to put
weight on it because you're you're
you're a tetr pod so you're going to try
to put weight on it uh you're going to
grind that that wound into the forest
floor it's going to get infected it's
going to uh you might even bleed out and
so unlike a salamander which has the ab
ility to sort of float buoyantly in
peace and quiet for you know for for
months you you really don't have the
luxury of hanging out and regenerating
your your best strategy is to seal the
wound scar have some inflammation and
you know live on hopefully to to tell
the story now there is one example of a
mammal that does amazing regeneration
and it's an appendage that you don't put
weight on so it's deer antlers so in
Deer they grow uh these these massive
structures bone vasculature inovation
velvet they grow a centimeter and a half
per day of these things when they're
when they're growing out I mean it's
it's it's crazy and they can do it and
and is it a coincidence that that's the
one thing you don't put weight on I
don't know I do want to say something
about um your point about uh unexpected
capabilities I think this is this is
really critical and we I don't know if
you've seen this thing but but a few
weeks ago we put out a preprint on this
is a purely computational um study what
what I what I wanted was um and this is
this was this was done with my student
tening Jang and U Adam Goldstein um we
wanted to uh I I wanted to really hit
this issue of unexpected capabilities
because because working in diverse
intelligence research which I think is
hugely important and completely
basically um unknown in the AI community
and I think it's a real problem I think
I think um a lot of the answers to
things that people have been um sort of
debating in AI are really have their
origins in diverse intelligence research
but one of the one of the um kind of
fundamental aspects that there is that
you can find intelligence AKA problem
solving capacities in very minimal
unconventional systems really the the
idea that we do not have a good
intuition for what to expect when we
build systems we don't know never never
mind immersion complexity that's easy
you know fractals Game of Life Cell
automati complexity is easy but but but
what also tends to happen is is there's
emergent agency so ability to pursue
goals and and solve problems and we are
terrible at noticing these things and
when they're in unfamiliar substrates so
what we did in this paper was I I wanted
something that was extremely simple
transparent and the thing about biology
is that in biology there's always more
mechanism to be discovered so no matter
what you show somebody will say well
there there really is a mechanism for
that you just didn't find it yet right
so we wanted something super simple um
and what we chose were sorting
algorithms so these things that computer
science students have been studying for
many decades you know bubble sword
selection sword that kind of stuff and
completely deterministic everything is
right there it's completely open you
know six lines of code there's really
nowhere to hide like it's all it's all
there and what we were able to show is
that if you treat them if you're if
you're a little bit humble about um what
these things can do and you ask
questions uh about what they can do and
and rather than making assumptions that
they only do what the algorithm tells
them to do you actually find some uh
really important capabilities that are
nowhere in the algorithm they're sort of
implic so there's the explicit algorithm
that sorts a list of numbers and that's
there and you can't get away from that
they will in fact sort list of numbers
but um it turns out that they have some
really interesting um properties and
some uh some some novel capabilities
that we did not know about and so I
think that if that's the case for these
really minimal dumb sorting algorithms
then something as unique and novel as
these large deep networks and all the
other stuff that is made in AI I don't
think we've even scratched the surface
of what's really going on there you know
that the the the capacity for surprise
in even small systems is I think massive
okay so I have to ask what can the sort
uh I haven't seen this pre-print yet
what can the sort algorithms do that is
not obvious I'll give you two examples
so so just to just to introduce this
this story uh the typical um sorting
algorithm is you sort of have this uh
this Central Godlike Observer who who
sees the whole string and under some
algorithm is you know moving around the
moving the numbers around right so we
made we made two changes to be able to
study this one one is that we said uh to
make it a little more biological we said
well instead of having a central uh
algorithm we're going to we're going to
do it bottom up in a distributed way so
every so so you've got an array of
numbers every array element is we're
going to call it a cell that cell has
some numerical value from zero to 100
assigned to it they start out randomly
you know randomly um uh mixed up and
what we're going to do is every cell is
going to follow it the algorithm so for
example every cell it doesn't see the
whole string but it wants the neighbors
so the five wants a four on its left and
a six on its right and and and every
cell wants that and we're just going to
you know we're going to we're going to
let every cell be be um be its own um
its own agent so so the first thing you
find out is that if you do that it still
works they actually sort themselves
quite you know quite well the next thing
we did is we said okay now we're going
to let go of the Assumption of Reliable
Hardware in other words if the algorithm
says swap the numbers well they might be
broken one of the cells might not swap
in the standard algorithm you never
check whether in fact the numbers got
swapped the way you wanted them to nor
do you check how are you doing you don't
do any of that right you assume the
hardware is reliable and you just like
that's it we we kept all that we did not
introduce any new code for any of the
things that I'm about to tell you they
do we didn't put in any new code so the
code is exactly the standard stuff that
everybody studies just being run
individually on on every cell so the
first thing that happens is that um if
you introduce defects in the string so
you introduce broken
cells it still does a really good job
sorting in fact um uh it will sort other
numbers around the broken numbers if it
can't again there's no Cote in there to
say that hey was this one broken did it
move no no quote about that one of the
interesting things about uh intelligence
and trying to estimate intelligence is
this and this was uh William James had
this example he said think about the the
spectrum between two magnets trying to
get together and Romeo and Julia trying
to get together right imagine you put a
piece of wood between the two magnets
the two magnets are just going to stand
there pressed up against the wood
they're never going to go around because
in order to go around you have to
temporarily get further from your goal
let's call that capability delayed
gratification so this idea is that I'm
going to reduce the thing that I'm being
um opt the thing that I'm optimizing I'm
actually going to going to reduce that
in order to acquire gains later on I
mean that's a you know it's not super
high intelligence but it's a it's a it's
an ingredient to being being able to do
that is an ingredient otherwise you're
just a a very simple gradient follower
you're not going to get too far right um
unlike Romeo and Juliet who have all
kinds of tools cognitive tools you know
to to to get get around social and
physical barriers they planning they
have all stuff so uh delayed
gratification so it turns out that if
you actually track as these algorithms
are sorting the numbers when you
introduce these broken cells which if
you visualize one of the things we did
was visualize the Sorting process as a
journey in sort space so they all have
to get to one point where everything is
sorted and they start out at different
points but it's like this path and they
all take these different paths a broken
cell is basically a barrier in that path
so you're walking along then you you
want to move the cell and you can't it
just doesn't move how are you going to
get around this barrier it turns out
that these algorithms and some more than
others we looked at I think four
different ones some of them have the
capacity for delayed gratification what
they do is they'll go move some other
numbers around and in fact the sorted
this drops for a while the string gets
less sorted for a while and then they
they catch the gains later right it it
it becomes better later now this is this
is already quite amazing because there
is nothing in that algorithm that
explicitly I me if you just look at the
algorithm there's nothing in there that
explicitly says you have the capacity
for delayed gratification and they do
this more when there are more barriers
in other words they don't just randomly
back up and you know sort of wander
around no they're they're extremely
linear until it comes time to deal with
a barrier and then they sort of dip down
and and come back so so that's that's
one kind of capability that that we
found that they're actually able to to
move around barriers like that without
any any U you know explicit code for it
the other amazing thing is this imagine
that um once you've put the algorithm in
the individual cells you can do a really
cool chimeric experiment meaning that
you could have cells that are running
different algorithms so so you can mix
so so let's say some cells are running
selection sword some some some of them
are running bubble sort for example and
um the thing is that uh none of the
algorithms have any code to know which
one they are so they don't they don't
have any you know data about what they
are nor do they have any ability to look
my neighbor and see what he's doing
you're just following your algorithm you
have no idea what what it is you're just
following your algorithm now now imagine
at the very beginning we have 100 cells
and we mix it randomly right so every
cell has now two properties it has the
number that it's trying to sort and it
has which algorithm it's following okay
so there's two two types of two types of
cells they're randomly distributed and
and all of this by the way has
developmental biology um consequences
because the ability to sort out tissues
is is you know animals do this so frog
um embryonic frogs if we make we call a
Picasso frog we we we start with a
tadpool with all the organs in the wrong
place all everything will sort out and
you'll get a very nice frog out the
other end so the eye will get back to
where it needs to be the chaws will come
like they know how to sort themselves
out and and we make chimeric animals too
we make um what we call Frog otles so
it's got a bunch of frog cells and a
bunch of Axel cells and you can actually
ask this different Hardware that
normally makes different things how do
they like what's it going to make right
so um so so imagine we we have this
chimeric string and then we're going to
ask a simple question uh what is the
degree of clustering at any point in
time in other words what's the
probability that when you look to the
cell next to you it's the same type as
you are and Adam actually um invented
this term which I like a lot called
algot type so algot type so there's
genotype you know which is which is the
the algorithm that you're following
there's the phenotype which is what
actually happens in biology and then the
algo type is like what algorithm you
know what algorithm are you actually
running right so so what's the
probability as I look as I look at my
neighbor that he's the same algo type as
I am
now initially at the beginning it's 50%
because we assigned algot types to
numbers randomly so you know it has to
be 50% yeah at the very end it's also
50% because at the very end everybody's
got to get sorted in order and the
assignment of algot types to numbers was
random so of course it's going to be 50%
again right because you've now
reshuffled everything in order but there
was no pattern so there's still not
going to be pattern 50% so if you
imagine this graph so so 50% here 50%
here but during the Sorting period it
actually goes like this and what it
means is that in the middle of the
Sorting period they are uh they sort
together so so so common algot types
like to hang out together now this is
this is kind of um a weird way to to to
to think about it but to me it's almost
like a minimal model of of The Human
Condition it's like eventually the
physics of your world are going to pull
you apart because right because because
the the the the sort the actual sorting
algorithm is inexorable you can't get
away from it So eventually you're going
to you're going to get you know you're
going to get yanked yanked apart but up
until then you have this life that that
allows you to do some cool things that
are compatible they're not they're not
um in you know they're not um directly
forced by the laws of physics but
they're compatible with them and you get
to do this thing where you hang out with
your buddies for a while until you get
you know you get sort of sort of yanked
apart into into what the what the um
what the physics is trying to do and so
that's something that's completely non
obvious from the algorithm you you'll
you'll never know looking at the
algorithm that that that's it was going
to do I have a gut feeling that this can
be harnessed uh in various ways uh you
know uh the fact that it's the fact that
it's also um clustering it means that
you can get multiple um work out of the
same algorithm it might be doing other
things and again this idea that even
something as simple as the Sorting
algorithm has this other property that
we wouldn't have guessed until we
checked right until we until we try you
know we we we actually asked what what
what are you act what are you actually
doing um besides the thing we asked you
to do you know what what else is baked
in and uh yeah that that kind of
emergent ability to maximize other
outcomes besides the ones that that are
explicitly programmed in I think is is
probably all over the place both in
biology and in in in
AI we'll continue our interview in a
moment after a word from our
sponsors hey everyone Eric here in this
environment Founders need to become
profitable faster and do more with
smaller teams especially when it comes
to
engineering that's why Sean lahan
started Squad a specialized Global
Talent firm for top Engineers that will
seamlessly integrate with your
org Squad offers rigorously vetted top
1% talent that will actually work hard
for you every day their Engineers work
in your time zone follow your processes
and use your tools squad has front-end
Engineers excelling in typescript and
react and nextjs ready to onboard to
your team today for backend Squad
Engineers are experts at node.js python
Java and a range of other languages and
Frameworks while May cost more than the
freelancer on upwork billing you for 40
hours but working only two Squad offers
premium quality at a fraction of the
typical cost without the headache of
assessing for skills and culture fit
Squad takes care of sourcing legal
compliance and local HR for Global
Talent increase your velocity without
amping up burn visit chw squad.com and
mention turpentine to skip the wait list
there are so many different uh follow-up
questions I want to ask about all that
at least kind of three big themes though
one is and I know you've developed this
in different papers and different venues
but definitely very relevant I think in
the AI context is this sense
that the once supposedly very clear
distinction between life and
machine maybe was never really properly
so clear in the first place or at a
minimum now seems to be kind of blurring
I'd love to hear you talk about that
especially as it relates to this notion
of emergence which is one that I don't
know how closely you're following the AI
discourse but intense debate right now
about emergence you know how to conceive
of it what should count is it a mirage
actually a best paper award at nurs the
recent um you know major AI conference
was given to a paper arguing that
emergence is a mirage which I think is
honestly put my cards on the table kind
of missing the point on the on a few key
levels but you could talk about this I'm
sure for 10 hours but Mr especially with
this kind of eye toward people are like
oh well it's AI it's just computer code
it'll never do anything unexpected we
can control it right and you are really
even with some pretty simple systems
calling that into question yeah I guess
you can react to that however however
you want but I'm very interested in how
you project what you're learning with
these small systems and these biological
systems onto this notion of possible
emergence in AI I I'll be kind of
philosophical for a moment and then
let's let's talk about definitions a
little bit and then and then I'll give
some practical examples all of these
terms machine human robot alive um
emergent what are all these terms for
what what are they supposed to do for us
so I take all of these terms as um
engineering protocol claims so so what I
hear I I I don't I think they're all
mirages in in an important sense all of
it in an important sense I think all of
these terms are not objective truths I
think they are claims about the utility
of a particular worldview from the point
of view of some perspective of from the
perspective of some other agent
including the system Itself by the way
so so so cognitive systems have to have
models of themselves all of these things
are different models of what's going on
I think that um emergence is basically a
kind of expression of how of surprise in
an observer so if you knew something was
going to happen you don't think it's
emergent if you if you were smart enough
to predict that in advance from the from
knowing the rules about the parts then
to you it's not emerging to somebody
else uh who couldn't predict it it's
absolutely emergent and so so I don't
think I don't think these are binary
categories I don't think there's a true
you know kind of an objective truth as
to whether something is emergent or not
I think everything is from the point of
view of some Observer so now all of this
business about machines and and uh you
know and and and living things and so on
look you you do not want an orthopedic
surgeon who doesn't believe that your
body is a simple machine if you watch if
if you look at what orthopedic surgeons
do they got Hammers and they've got
chisels and they've got nails and screws
and and absolutely treat your body as a
as a machine okay and and you want them
to that that is the right that is the
right frame for what they're trying to
do do you want a psychotherapist that
thinks you're a machine you do not and
so so right so so there are there are
different levels of um of of this
Framing and this is this so so I've got
this thing called the tame framework T
stands for technological approach to
mind everywhere which Begins by setting
out a um a spectrum all the way from
mechanical you know clocks and things
like that all the way up to humans all
kinds of things in between where what's
different between them is it's not what
they're made of and it's not how they
got here it's not whether you were
engineered or you were evolved or or if
you're squishy and you know and alive I
I really as a it's weird to say as a
biologist I have very little interest in
whether something's alive I'm not even
sure that's a useful category really I
think now now now Co now the level of
cognition that's super interesting and
but I don't think it necessarily tracks
with being alive at all and um what's
what what happens when you when you move
across that Spectrum is the you change
tools as far as how some as how some
other Observer is going to interact with
you so the way you interact with
mechanical clocks is very different than
the optimal way to interact with
cybernetic devices like thermostats
versus learning agents like you know
animals and some other you know some
robotics versus humans and so on so are
we machines yes are we amazing agential
uh creatures that do things that simple
machines don't do absolutely yeah you
know our aspects of our psychology
robotic sure are there aspects that are
that are not yep uh you know all all all
of it it's it's it's I think what gets
us in trouble is assumptions of uh that
these are binary categories I think I
think there is no such thing I I think
these binary categories don't exist and
and assumptions that um all of this is
uh has an objective answer that we
should just discover what it is and then
and then we're done and even worse some
people try to make decisions on this
from a philosophical armchair in other
words they look at something go oh well
that's just I see what that is that's
just physics that's not cognitive like
well you have to do experiments you
can't you can't just have feelings about
where something is on that Spectrum you
have to do experiments for example we
took um Gene regulatory Network models
which are extremely simple um either
Boolean or ordinary differential
equation networks and again
deterministic very simple you know very
simple nowhere died we show that they
can do six different kinds of learning
including pepian conditioning right just
out of the box and you wouldn't know
that you know if you if you if you have
the commitment at something that's that
looks like that has to be stupid you you
wouldn't know that and who knows what
else they can do so I I feel very
strongly that this is uh these are all
empirical questions and if you can find
a frame that you've taken from
Behavioral Science or or from you know
one or from cybernetics or something and
if you can usefully apply it to that
system then then there it is then then
then you found you know you found a good
way to deal with so so yeah I I I don't
believe that this this machine life
distinction is is valuable at all I've
never seen I've never seen anything
really um uh useful useful come from
trying to enforce a binary distinction
like that one of the things I think is
really striking about some of your
findings is just how small scale
intelligence can be you know whether
it's a clump of cells you know that
constitute a xenobot or an anthr robot
or it's even just you know apparently a
you know virtual cells in a in a running
a little sorting algorithm but it it
starts to get confusing I guess when
it's like okay how small can we get you
know is there is there some nature a lot
of these systems maybe not all but a lot
of them do seem to have like multiple
scales so I'm kind of wondering does
like is that multiple scale question
critical could you have something that
just works at a single scale what would
that even look like and also you said
this you know this framework for mind
everywhere do you have any intuition for
how this relates to you kind of said Stu
you know everything is subjective does
that also imply that there is some
subjective experience on behalf of these
systems like do you think these little
sorting cells have any sense of
experience I think these questions are
also you know very under theorized in AI
people are today just like oh well it's
an AI of course it doesn't you know have
any experience or have any moral value
I'm not rushing to say that they do but
I'm I'm also like you seem very quick
you know everybody seems so confident in
that and I'm kind of like not so
confident yeah yeah well one thing I
could say for sure is that we absolutely
cannot be confident because we do not
know I mean I hear people all the time
making these pronouncements that
definitely is or it definitely isn't no
we we we do not have a principled way of
answering these questions for the
biological world and that means we have
we're completely out to seat when we're
faced with unconventional embodiments
and we we know this you know um science
fiction has been at this for for well
over 100 years this idea that when
something shows you know lands on your
front yard and sort of trundles out and
and it's it's kind of shiny but also
it's giving you a poem about um how
happy it is to meet you and it's kind of
got wheels and you're not quite sure
where it came from but also it's you
know it's h you're having a great
conversation with it like what what are
you going to use as a Criterion for for
how you're going to treat it and so on
so all of the old uh categories that we
used to have in terms of well did you
come from a factory or did you come from
the process of a random mutation and
selection right or those kind of things
these are all terrible categories and
and they're not good ways to of making
that distinction Let's uh let's let's
let's talk about the first question
about um how how low down does It Go I
mean people even uh there's there's um a
minimal active matter research where
people can make uh very simple systems
out of like three inorganic chemicals
and then they can solve mazes and they
can do interesting things so I think
that all of this really becomes
disturbing when you insist on a binary
category when you want to know okay is
it cognitive or isn't it and then then
then then you've got a real problem
because look each of us starts out Life
as a single unfertilized oite it's a
sing it's a little blob of chemistry uh
it's a we we look at it and we say okay
very clearly this does not have um the
kinds of cognitive capacities that that
humans have nine months and maybe a
couple years later you've got something
that obviously does developmental
biology offers no sharp line during this
process where lightning bolt says okay
now you've gone from physics to mind
okay there is nothing like that the
whole process is smooth and continuous
so there is no Escape so so all all of
this these continual first of all
there's the Continuum of development
then there's the Continuum of evolution
if you think that you as a human have
some very um you know sort of specific
um competencies just start walking
backward so so which of your homed
ancestors and which of the you know sort
of mammals before you and before that
and eventually you get to something
that's basically a you know much less
complex than a current single cell
organism where did those things Peter
out right there is no good story about
that it is imperative that we understand
that it's not are we cognitive or aren't
we it's how much and what kind right it
has it it cannot be binary there's no
way to support not not only that now
with with um bioengineering and Robotics
we can make combinations so if you think
machines are not what you know whatever
and and humans are fine so right now we
have cyborgs walking around we have
people with microchips in their heads
and various other you know insulin pumps
and various other things that's only
going to continue now right now now
right now you're you're dealing with I
mean talk about non- neurotypical like
right now you've got somebody that's you
know 98% human maybe 2% digital
eventually you're going to get to 5050
and every other kind of combination what
are you going to do that are you are are
you going to do it by weight like what
percentage of you is is original parts
and what percentage of you is cyborg
ridiculous right so there there is
absolutely no way to maintain this hard
distinction um an interesting question
might
be is there anything in this universe
that is uh that is zero on the cognitive
scale okay because because I think I
think very simple things already are not
zero now the question is is there a zero
so so this is this is a hard question uh
I'll tell you what I think about it
right now um let's ask this uh what
would the most simple the most basil
like the most basic versions of agency
look like what what do you need for that
now it's obviously not going to you know
people people say well you think that
the rocks have hopes and dreams like us
no you have to scale down the point
isn't that it's going to have our level
of cognition what does the most minimal
level look like right the smallest
possible well I think you need two
things for that um you need some degree
of goal directedness and that in William
James's definition is the ability to
reach the same uh state by using um by
by different means okay so same goal by
different means so you need some degree
of goal directedness and you need to be
not completely uh your your actions need
to be not completely explainable by
current local conditions so if if if
what you're going to do is completely
determined by all the physical forces
acting on you right now then you're
probably some sort of billyard ball and
and that's you know that's it so those
two things I think even particles have
those because least action least action
kind of laws in physics tell you that
there's gold directness baked into the
the bottom levels of the universe and
Quantum in determinacy gives you a
really dumb version of uh of of not
being predictable by local conditions
it's not great cognition because it's
random I that's not really what we like
from but but it's something and so and
so here's here's what I would say if if
there is any kind of a definition to
life I think life we call Life those
things that are really good at scaling
those up so if you got a rock it has no
more capabilities than the parts that
went in it didn't scale it's sort of
lateral and it's bigger but that's it if
you've got something that's alive it's
cranking up the the agency the
indeterminacy and the goal directedness
across every scale of organization and
um it's cognitive L cone is is
increasing uh uh you know as a function
of time so my my my friend and colleague
Chris Fields who's a was a brilliant
physicist among other things I asked him
so so can you have a universe in which
there is no least action in which like
there would be zero and he said that
only you know in a universe where
nothing ever happened right in a
completely static Universe where nothing
ever happened it would be zero but as
soon as you get you get interactions
already you know you've got you've got
the basics of the least so so I believe
uh in this universe I don't think there
is a zero I think everything has some
capacity but some things um scale it up
in an interesting way and some don't and
that means that for some things the
tools of Behavioral uh science are going
to be applicable and for some things
they're not right and that's the
empirical that that's that's why this is
not the same thing as ancient animism
where you saw a spirit in every Rock
because it actually does not pay off to
treat rocks with tools from Behavioral
Science but it does pay off to treat
Gene regulatory networks that way and it
absolutely pays off to treat various
animals that way because that's how
humans train dogs and horses knowing
zero neurosciences because there's this
there's this amazing interface that some
animals uh expose that that you can you
can train them so yeah and then and then
I guess the last thing uh the last thing
you talked about is is about um inner
like this inner perspective I I I try
not to say too much yet about
Consciousness per se but but we can we
can say something about inner
perspective and which systems have it
and which systems don't here's what I
think imagine uh imagine a landscape you
know kind of a hilly up and down
landscape and you got a bowling ball on
this landscape in order to know what
this bowling ball is going to do and to
make it do whatever it is that you want
it to do all you have to do as an
external Observer is to pay attention to
your ver your view of the landscape your
third person view of that landscape
tells the whole story you know where the
Hills and Valleys are that's all you
have to know you don't need to take into
account anything else now imagine a
mouse on that landscape when you got a
mouse on that land ape your view of that
landscape is not really that relevant
what's really relevant is the mouse's
view of land that landscape because he
might have been rewarded and punished in
different at different times in
different locations he might have he
he's he's seeing that landscape in a
completely different way there's a
there's a you know there's a veilance
map sort of superimposed on it that he's
got his own opinions about where he's
going to go and so for all these
different systems you can sort of ask to
what degree and again it's not going to
be a binary thing it's never going to be
a binary thing but you can ask to what
degree do I need to take the perspective
of that system and ask what does it see
and what does it think about what it's
going to do so that to the extent that
you have to do that a lot you're dealing
with a high agency system that has an
inner perspective to the degree that you
can get everything done by your own
model of what's going on then probably
it doesn't right and so and so that I
think is a is a is a Uris by which we
can start to say um how much inner
perspective can I expect from these
things and I I really you know as far as
being being sure that I mean look let's
be clear I am not claiming that today's
AI architectures are mimicking human
brains okay I don't think they are I
don't think they're mimicking human
cognition although they do have some
interesting things and common that
people don't realize but um I I don't
think they have to the point about AI is
not that you have to be a human for us
to have to be kind to you there there
are many there are many um living beings
that that are nowhere near humans and
the same thing for danger right you
don't need to be human level or above to
be dangerous there many really dumb
things that are extremely dangerous so
the thing we have to understand is that
you cannot pin your hopes for for being
able to distinguish like moral worth and
things like that you cannot pin pin that
on what are you made of because there's
nothing magical about um a protoplasm
you cannot pin it on being an evolved
biological because there's nothing
magical about the random meanderings of
The evolutionary process which you know
just it doesn't optimize for anything
that we care about it doesn't optimize
for intelligence or you know meaning or
anything like that it optimizes for
survival for copy number and um and and
so none of those things none of those
things are really reliable guys you you
have you you can't you know you can't
say uh just by um by knowing what
something is made of or how it got here
we have to have principled Frameworks
for making that decision and and we
don't have them yet in biology really
very much so I guess the beginning of
maybe a framework for starting to make
sense of those you kind of touched on a
little bit in those comments but just to
kind of pull out a couple of definitions
I'll try to try to do it briefly you
tell me if I'm missing anything I've
heard you define intelligence as the
ability to solve problems in some space
I think that kind of notion of in some
space is interesting and then you said
kind of also here's the question of like
not are we or aren't we but how much and
you've you used the term the cognitive
like cone there I think in other words
kind of what is your sort of domain of
concern and like possible reach you know
or how far can you project you your
influence into the world and that is
sort of a way of thinking about how much
um
intelligence you might have does that
extend all the way up to sort of nature
as a whole you're thinking of like the
Gaia hypothesis that's a far out one in
many people's minds but it seems to
follow pretty naturally from what you're
saying yeah so so the key the key to all
this so first let me let me Define um
the cogni of lonee is the size of the
largest goals that you can pursue okay
so you can think about what are the what
are the things that matter to a
bacterium what are the things that
matter to a dog what are the things that
can matter to a human and and you know
and could we have at some point a being
that like literally is in the linear
range can care about all the living
beings on earth like we we can't do it
as humans but but maybe our next you
know some next stage of evolution can so
so it's it's this idea of of what are
the what are the what are the size of of
goals that you could actually maintain
the important thing about this is that
you can't decide that just by thinking
about it you have to do experiments
because the way you find goals is by
perturbing the system you cannot infer
uh intelligence or goal directedness by
pure observations you have to do
perturbative experiments so what that
means is um you put barriers between
that you you make a hypothesis what
problem space is it operating in what
are the goals these are all hypotheses
and multiple observers could have
different hypothesis what what what are
the goals what competencies does it have
to reach those goals and now you get to
test that hypothesis by putting in
different barriers and seeing what it
does right does it have long-term
planning does it have does it have
larning does it have you know what what
what what can it what can it do so with
respect to the Gaia hypothesis some
people say absolutely not some people
say well I like to think it does and
therefore it does neither neither of
those is any good because because you
can't do any of that without doing
experiments now can you do can you do
experiments in uh so for example people
have said to me well you know that
sounds that sounds like you're going to
say the
weather the weather has some some degree
of cognitive ability well I'm not going
to say that because we don't know yet
but one thing that this framework does
for you is it doesn't close off the
possibility of testing it to find out do
I know that if you had the appropriate
ways to change the temperature the
pressure of air and whatever you
couldn't use some kind of a habituation
or sensitization assay or an associative
learning to uh to show those things in a
I don't know in a hurricane or something
we don't know I mean that's an empirical
question right that the the thing about
the thing about this framework is that
is that it does not let you just sort of
pick answers out of thin air it requires
you to do experiments so so guia you
know can we show that ecosystems learn
well ecosystems have stress you know
would would an ecosystem be able to um
uh show different kinds of learning
anticipation we don't know but that can
be tested we're we're actually testing
this right now I have I have a student
who's testing this in the Predator prey
um kinds of models to see if they can
actually learn from from experience so
we look we don't know these are all
these are all um testable questions so
is it possible that um you know on the
scale of I mean people ask you know on
the scale of galaxies or something that
that you know we're a giant like we're
part of a giant mine I I think
absolutely possible I don't think we
know and I don't think you can say yes
or no just you know based on
philosophical um commitments you have to
do experiments that's maybe a great um
place to kind of segue to some questions
that I have
about maybe recommendations or sort of
inspiration that you could give to
people working to understand AI systems
better and I think you know you you said
there you can't just sit and guess right
you have to do a perturbative believe is
the word experiment to see what is going
on in the AI World broadly there's a lot
of debate
around the degree to which AI systems
are generalizing beyond the distribution
that they've seen in
training and it strikes me that some of
the experience that you've done
particularly like as you said
rearranging the face of a tadpole or
whatever and and watching as they sort
of reconstruct their faces one way to
talk about what you're doing there is
you're taking them way outside of the
distribution of what presumably they had
ever seen in evolutionary history I mean
maybe right but that seems pretty like
you you found a dark corner that you
know presumably has not been previously
explored so with AI we're trying to kind
of begin to wrap our heads around that
do you have any sort of you know advice
like habits of mind um food for thought
you know any kind of
suggestions from what you've learned in
in your work that people could take
inspiration from on the AI side yeah um
well there's two there's two kinds of
things uh there are some very specific
um biological principles that uh I think
would be would be interesting and then
and then there are kind of General ways
to to think about this in terms of the
the whole debate about AI I mean I want
to say a couple things uh one one thing
about embodiment so so there's a lot of
talk about um real people say well if
it's just a software agent if it's not
embodied if it's not integrated into the
real world and you know kind of
grappling with with some sort of um
embodied physical physical existence it
doesn't you know it doesn't have real uh
it doesn't have real real it doesn't
know what it's talking about it's
shuffling s symbols right this is the
old like dfus argument and all that kind
of stuff so I want to say something
interesting about I hope about
embodiment embodiment is absolutely
critical but embodiment isn't what we
think it is people think embodiment is a
physical robot that hangs out in
three-dimensional space and that's
because most of our sense organs are
pointed outwards and they're optimized
for tracking medium scale objects moving
at medium speeds imagine if we had uh
imagine if we had a sense organ for our
own body chemistry let's say inside our
blood vessels we had something like a
tongue that could like feel I don't know
20 parameters of our of our um
physiology I think cognitively we would
we would uh be living in a 23
dimensional space and we would
immediately recognize our liver and our
kidneys as uh uh intelligent beings that
navigate that space they have goals they
have certain competencies to reach those
goals every day we throw you know wacky
at them and they and they know how
to they know how to navigate um that
space and they have certain competencies
and they and they live and they strive
and they suffer in that space so I think
uh biology tells us that there are many
spaces there are spaces of gene
expression there are anatomical morphos
spaces where the anatomical collective
intelligence operates there are um
metabolic spaces uh there are then then
of course there's the familiar
threedimensional space of De of behavior
and then there are linguistic spaces and
so on embodiment can take place in any
of those intelligence can take place in
any of those so so the first thing I
would say is to take very seriously um
this idea that you know is popular in in
in science fiction and whatever that
this physical space that you're in is
not privileged in some way and
everything else is is virtual there are
many other spaces and they are just as
real there are other beings that live in
these other spaces many of them are in
our bodies right now and and those
spaces are no less real than this one
it's just that you know our left
hemisphere like you know this this is
this is the this is the um the kind of
sense data that it that it mostly gets
and that's why we all feel like we live
in this space and every yeah so so
that's so that's the first thing so
that's I I say that about embodiment
something else I would say is about this
issue of a symbol binding and grounding
right this this idea that well you know
it shuffles letters and it shuffles
words and so on but but they're not
grounded to anything it doesn't you know
it doesn't know what they mean if you
have kids and you watch you watch a
little human uh develop which you see
very quickly is that they start out as
kind of uh Happy go-lucky pattern
matchers they will just sort of repeat
stuff they hear they see what sticks and
they sort of talk about all kind all
kinds of stuff that they have actually
no actual grounding on and then
eventually they get to the point where
you say oh wow yeah he really knows what
he's talking about what he's saying that
this is a smooth process it's not a
categorical yes you you are real or no
you're not in fact I don't know about
you but but but I I thought um at one
point I tried to sort of estimate what
like what percentage of the things that
I talk about are actually grounded in
the sense that I've had actual
experience with them you know I I I can
you know we we can talk about all kinds
of stuff you know places we've never
been and and you know all the all kinds
of all kinds of things we've never seen
a ton of our cognitive uh fod is not
grounded to anything it's just tied to
other stuff so it's it's important to to
be clear that a lot of these uh supposed
distinctions are really um are really
spous you know this issue of um
confabulation right I mean humans
confabulate constantly there is there is
uh you know there's a good theory that
basically says that um part of your your
language uh ability is basically just to
tell stories about what your brain is
already doing right after the fact to
conco good stories that you can just
share them with others and increase
cooperation there's some amazing uh you
know some some amazing data on on split
brain patients and and and other other
cases where it's very clear that we're
very comfortable confabulators so so
there are these distinctions again not
not saying that the current
architectures capture what's essential
about about um about life because I I
don't think they do but but but a lot of
these things are um not not uh the
biology isn't what what what people
think what people think it is and I
would encourage uh a workers in AI to
think about the whole spectrum of
diverse intelligence cells organs
tissues chimeras cyborgs hybrids um not
just like the standard adult human that
you know that that that we think about
as a as a as a as a Counterpoint this
idea of um of of the ethics and uh the
kind of the impact of Highly competent
AIS and and people say this is this is
really scary you know we're creating
these these these um intelligent
entities and we're we're going to let
them loose into the world and we don't
know what they're going to do we've been
doing that for millions of years it's
called having children we already do
that all of us we we create these
guaranteed High intelligent um AG we do
our best or not during the critical um
kind of training phases and then we let
them into the world and sometimes they
do you know miraculous things and
sometimes they do horrible things and so
I think a lot of a lot of the issues
that we have around AI right now I mean
obviously there's some unique ones but
but most of the issues around Ai and and
what are we going to do to stay relevant
and you know what happens to
collaboration into AI art and all this
kind of stuff is really just reflections
of existential issues that humans have
been strugg with for a really long time
you know these are all fears about uh
what what happens you know what do the
next Generations think of us as they as
they mature and you know and fears about
humans and what does it mean to stay
human yeah I mean we can we can we can
talk about that too you know this issue
of what what do we want to persist you
know as far as people being worried that
we're we're begin to get taken over and
so on is a whole whole thing we could
talk about there this is extremely
thought-provoking on a lot of uh
different levels one quick follow up on
the
perturbative
experiments it seems like there is a
decent analogy I can already start to
see between some of the things that
you're doing and you know there's there
is a lot of weird stuff that is that is
kind of on the edges of of modern AI
research but is like remarkably it kind
of works um stuff that I think probably
would get a lot more energy if the
mainline stuff weren't working so well
then people would be kind of forced to
go out and explore more of you know
these kind of weird Frontiers but right
now the the vein of just progress in the
main line research is so rich that you
know there's not a lot of incentive in
many cases to to go outside of it but
you do see these things which kind of
remind me of of some of your work where
you know you can for example take a lot
of Weights in a lot of models and just
drop a ton of the weights to zero and
find that oh hey it still kind of works
you know and you can you know take two
pre-trained models and put a little
connector between the two of them freeze
the pre-trained ones and just train the
connector and get kind of Novel behavior
that you know neither model could could
come up with on its own I guess you know
I'm riing there I think that kind of
work feels really important it also to
me it does feel a little bit I mean the
whole AI Enterprise to me not like any
individual modern-day experiment the
whole AI Enterprise does feel to me a
little bit dangerous to be totally
honest because unlike our children who I
think we have a pretty good handle on
kind of you know just how big their you
know individual light cones may be I I
think we may very well create something
in the AI realm that just has like way
bigger scope of action than anything
we're used to and then you know that
could go badly for us it it sounded to
me like you weren't too worried about
that maybe you're just not that worried
about it but I wouldn't based on
everything we've talked about I find it
hard to imagine you would rule that out
or see some reason that like that
shouldn't be an issue that people would
worry about at all right no it's it's
definitely an issue but but I I also
think that that issue is here long
before we make anything with a huge
cognitive lone so there are there are
many many uh things that are extremely
dangerous that do not have a large
cognitive lone and some of that is
because of how we relate or misrelated
to them so so I can imagine uh AIS that
are going to be uh that that would be
extremely deleterious for society but
not because they're so smart it's
because we're not that smart right and I
think that um we you know we we one of
the one of the big things that I think
uh is an existential risk scale thing
for Humanity is to develop a a a
principled science of where do goals of
Novel systems come from and how to uh
how to interact with uh ethically
interact with systems that are radically
different from us Minds that are
radically different from us we make uh
we make systems you know Internet of
Things social and financial structures
um AI obviously we make all these
different things we do not have a
science of where novel goals come from
systems not not just emerging complexity
that's bad enough emerging complexity is
bad enough but also what is to me clear
uh that can that that emerges is uh
emergent goals so systems that have some
degree of pursuing various goals and
some competency to to get those goals
met and uh we do not have a good science
of knowing when that's going to happen
and what those goals are going to be
what the competencies are going to be
and so I'm I'm not saying that that it
isn't possible that we make a a a hugely
um you know super intelligent AI that's
going to be a problem absolutely
possible but I think we need to realize
that that problem can occur long before
we get to that point our physical
infrastructure and also our our kind of
uh the general mental um uh Frameworks
that people are using are extremely
brittle you know most of the terminology
that that we rely on today in the legal
system in you know in interpersonal
relationships that stuff isn't going to
last the next decade or two like all
those terms are are going to crumble and
and it's not because we're dealing with
something yet that's super intelligent
it's because we haven't got the right uh
framework for for for dealing with other
mins that are different from from our
own that's that's where a lot of effort
has to go yeah that question of emerging
goals is definitely a very Salient one
in the AI space and I think you know
probably deserves to be even more focal
still but some challenges that we have
in AI today one is like figuring out
what the goal should be you know we have
the pre-training goal is just like
predict the next text then we've got
reinforcement learning from Human
feedback which is like satisfy the human
then we look at ourselves and as you
said we're kind of brittle we can you
know what satisfies the human is not
necessarily good for Humanity or you
know the ecosystem broadly or whatever
so lots of possible problems there
people start to think well maybe we
could have like multiple goals and we
could kind of you know this is sort of
what humans seem to have is like this
kind of multi-dimensional value maybe we
could have multiple goals we could
optimize systems for yikes okay couple
more and then I'll just let you go off
on all of them memory is a huge
challenge right now for AI we have you
know at least with the kind of systems
that people are most familiar with we've
got like the context window it can kind
of process that information densely at
runtime but there's not really another
level of memory in the in today's
Frontier system so people are kind of
rigging up all sorts of scaffolding and
like finding things that work and saving
those to a database and recalling them
later they're not very integrated so you
know you've got such incredibly
remarkable findings in terms of memory
and bioelectrical space in organisms
really interested in that robustness is
another big challenge right where these
AIS are like super human across like
passing All The Graduate School exams
but then we can trick them you know and
and they're so gullible it's like well
what's up with that there is something
definitely remarkable about our
robustness given our fite capability
that the AIS are not that close to yet
even like superhuman go player I don't
know if you saw this result but a
relatively simple attack was able to
beat you know the Superhuman go player
so I'll stop there the big ones gold
design memory robustness AI has a long
way to go to catch up to biology and I
wonder if you have any suggested
directions for the the AI
developers the thing the thing about
memory I'll I'll just give you a quick
biological example um caterpillar to
butterfly so so caterpillar soft-bodied
robot lives in a two-dimensional World
eats leaves butterfly is a hard-bodied
robot flies around 3D World drinks
nectar in order to get from here to
there you have to uh build a completely
new brain so what it does is during the
during the metamorphosis process it
basically dissolves most of the brain
most of the cells die most of the
connections are broken and then you know
you have a new brain that's suitable for
a completely different kind of creature
the memories that this has been shown
the memories that a caterpillar forms
are is still present in the butterfly
and in fact mapped onto its new kind of
Lifestyle we don't have any me to my
knowledge any memory in the in the
computer science world that can uh
survive such refactoring you know you
just tear the whole thing up and you
know sort of re re reuse the pieces and
now you can still you know retain the
original information um bi biology does
it quite differently um Josh bongard and
I have a have a paper on poly Computing
and this this uh this ability of
biological systems and subsystems to
reinterpret the same physical events
from their own perspective as multiple
different computations I think that's
actually pretty pretty key um also key
is the fact that Evolution doesn't make
specific solutions to specific
environments it makes problemsolving
machines this is why and and and I could
tell you all kinds of crazy um
capabilities that living things have to
deal with things that they've never seen
before in evolution and it's because
Evolution doesn't overtrain on on prior
experience it it produces multiscale
agents that are able to solve problems
in in in in new ways fundamentally for
for the use of AI we have to decide do
we want tools that we use for specific
purposes in which case pleasing the
human is probably a great goal to shoot
for or do we want true agents with uh
the kind of um open-ended intelligence
uh that that we have and the same moral
um worth that that we see among animals
and and among humans those are those are
very different things
honestly uh I I was I had started about
six months ago I started writing a paper
on specifically what parts of biology is
the current AI architectures are they
missing such that I you know uh what
what would and which which I think would
you know of course Elevate Elevate the
the whole the whole thing majorly
because I think I think they're just
missing some of the really exciting new
biology and I stopped and I'm not going
to write that paper not not that not
that somebody else isn't going to crack
it because they will so this is this is
you know not not going to solve this
issue because I think to whatever extent
I'm right and that those things are
actually what's critical about agency
they can easily be implemented in other
media they're not there's nothing magic
about um either Evolution or biological
substrates you can you can Implement
those those kinds of things in other
media but if you do to whatever extent
I'm right that those are the ingredients
to an actual mind that means that that
we are going to then generate you know I
don't know trillions of new agents with
moral worth and I I'm not interested in
in being responsible for that but but
but it's going to happen and I don't
think we need it you know I I think I
think people are going to do it just
because um to see if it can be done and
I think it's the equivalent of uh of you
know just you know having uh it's if you
do it correctly which and somebody will
do it correctly it's like the equivalent
of of of having trillions of new
children now you might think that your
job is to populate the cosmos with as
many Minds as possible I mean that's one
view but to me if if you're not able to
vouch for the kind of uh upbringing and
um and uh you know life they're going to
have then I think that's a mistake so so
so we can stick to the kind of AI that's
actually really I I I think that's
actually really helpful it's a it's a
tool it's a thinking tool for um for
humans it it doesn't have the kind of
open-endedness uh and the kind of agency
where you have to worry about it or you
don't know what it's going to decide to
do I I I think it would be much much
better to stick to that kind and it's
not because I think humans are you know
just the sort of end on this because a
lot of people are really worried that
we're going to get supplanted I I I
think we will and I think we should if
if you if you think forward you know
10,000 years from now what what what do
you want to be living on this Earth do
you really want it to be the exact same
humans that we have now that are subject
to lower back pain and stupid infections
and you know and they have about 80
years of of of productive lifespan and
then the kind things like why is that
something that we're attached to I'm not
interested in that at all I think I
think that any improvements that we can
make we to enlarge our cognitive light
gos to improve on our cognition to have
better embodiments whether those are you
know engineered or bioengineered or I I
don't care we we can certainly do better
than we do now right if if you know
anybody that's that's been to a hospital
knows that that this is this is not a
great embodiment that that we're in
right now it's amazing but the future
should be should be way better than this
so I'm not I'm not talking about um
limiting a AI because I think Humanity
should should be kind of freeze down in
the version that we are now I don't I
don't think there's any reason to kind
of um lock it down that way but I also
don't think that there's any particular
reason and I think there are good
reasons not to try really hard to make
new agents that have moral worth and I
and I absolutely think we could in other
substrates um including digital so yeah
I'm I'm you know sort of not really a uh
not really uh advertising those those
methods that I think actually could be
could be done but um but there's plenty
of other stuff uh that I think you know
is is perfectly reasonable and could and
could help um create better AI tools for
us I've been starting to think about
that same question from a different
angle what are the pieces that are
missing from the current AI systems and
you know what would it maybe look like
to solve them and what would the
consequences of that be and I I do think
you raise a a good um you know sanity
check on the wisdom of the direction of
that research when you look at the AIS
today you know one thing that is kind of
striking is we've got these language
models right and they you know just
predict the next token quote unquote
they're very much just you know happy to
be a chat bot for you but they are you
know they one you've said multiple times
like there's no binaries I always say AI
defies all binaries we try to put on it
this one also seems to be kind of defied
to a limited extent at least where you
know you you cast The Language model as
an agent you basically say you have a
goal and now I'm going to like put you
in a loop with you know some tool in the
world and they're like not very
effective agents but they start to look
something like Proto agents they
certainly like try to pursue the goal
and again usually fail but how do you
interpret that or how do you kind of
make sense of that sort of non-agent
versus Agent mode of the current systems
a lot of problems in thinking about this
arise from a comparing it to humans and
B comparing it to very high performance
humans so so I I sometimes I sometimes
hear um you know really uh really like
brilliant scientists or AI workers say
ah this thing is you know it can't even
do that how many people can do what
you're talking about like barely any of
them can your friends can because it's a
very select Elite population of human
minds but but most humans can't do that
we so so there's that and then and then
again look at look at the diversity of
life on Earth I mean we have other other
all kinds of other creatures that are
not humans that are um minimal or sort
of meso goal uh goal-seeking agents you
know you've got insects you've got
you know birds and fish and you've got
all these things for for AI to be uh to
be a real Asian it doesn't have to be
like a human you might be developing
some kind of weird insect like thing or
something like that and and let's let's
remember we are not very nice to all
kinds of creatures that are for sure AG
gental creatur so adult mammals right in
our food chain uh wh whom we eat so F
factory farming is a is a you know is is
an incredible moral lapse and it's not
because we don't understand that that
pigs are intelligent and that are
intelligent and that they have you know
um they deserve certain moral
protections and so on it's not because
we don't know it's that which just not
very good as a as a you know as a
species we're not very good at extending
our our cone of compassion to things
that are in any way different from us
right this this the stupidest slightest
difference is enough to trigger this
like self versus other thing and then
you know then you you know what happens
then it is absolutely erroneous to
assume that these systems do not have
some degree of gold directedness I think
that it's possible that we haven't
figured out how to how to um how to
measure it properly yet or it's possible
that that we have and it's just low like
fish or insects or or something like
that but it's again I'm not I'm not
claiming like I want to be clear I'm not
claiming that these architectures share
the important things you know share a
lot of the important things with life
one one thing that's super confusing
nowadays is that in the past you were
guaranteed that anything that talks also
shares your agential kind of Key
agential Properties that's no longer
true now we have these things that talk
but they actually I don't I don't think
they share them but that doesn't mean
the fact that they don't share them with
with you know Elite Adult modern humans
doesn't mean that they don't have any
they may have some and we are not good
at recognizing it and that's why I'm
saying that I'm not saying it because I
just be I'm not saying it because I'm
fooled by the by the chatbot action I'm
not saying it because I just sort of
assume that robots and AIS are going to
be that way I'm saying we do not have a
great way to detect it the biology end
so I and and we certainly do not have a
great way to detect it on an exobiology
end so like if we had you know if we had
alien life and so on we'd be we'd be
really up a creek actually we have no
clue and so I don't see any way to be
certain about anything with these with
these complex Creations well that is I
think an appropriately uh sober note to
end on I have really enjoyed reading
your work in preparation for this it is
fascinating and this conversation has
been super thought-provoking I'm sure
people people are going to take a lot
from it and I hope we can do it again at
some point in the not too distant future
but for now uh Professor Mike Leven
professor of biology at T University
thank you for being part of the
cognitive Revolution yeah thank you so
much yeah it was great to talk to you
I'm happy to happy to come back um you
should also try to get um Richard Watson
at Southampton if you uh if you uh if
you know his work uh he's got he's got a
lot of really interesting things to say
about this so that's that's something
else you might want cool that's a great
tip
[Music]
Upstream with Eric torberg is a show
from turpentine the podcast Network
behind Moment of Zen and cognitive
Revolution if you like the episode
please leave a review in the Apple
[Music]
Store hey everyone Eric here at
turpentine we're building the First
Media outlet for tech people by tech
people where're the network behind the
show you're listening to right now we
have a slate of hit shows across a range
of topics in industries from our Ai and
investing cluster of podcasts to shows
that drive the conversation in Tech with
the most interesting thinkers Founders
investors and influencers like econ 102
with Noah Smith we're launching new
shows every week and we're looking for
industry-leading sponsors if you think
that might be you and your company email
me at Eric turpentine doco that's ER ik
at turpentine doco and let's partner
together
[Music]